## Risk premia in real estate investment trusts and its application in a quantitative value strategy

This Python project was used in the dissertation submitted to the Professional Master's Program in Economics from [Insper](https://www.insper.edu.br/en/graduate/masters-of-science/) as a partial requirement for obtaining the Master's degree in Economics in 2021.

### Abstract

On the last decades, the asset pricing literature has addressed different classes and risk factors that explain the observed returns. Real estate investment trusts are a market worth more than a trillion dollars in the United States alone, but the literature does not have a great focus on these assets. This work seeks to analyze them, studying their relationship with other asset classes and the risk factors that explain their returns, extending a small literature specialized in the subject. In the US, what is observed is that these funds had an idiosyncratic component in their risk premium for most of the time in the 1990s, increasing their correlation with the stock market over the following years, until its peak with the outbreak of the 2008 financial crisis. After that, even without a statistically non-zero alpha, the results indicate a varying correlation over time, which may be related to global business cycles. A similar behavior occurred in the Brazilian market, which is younger. On the other hand, while the market beta for real estate funds is close to 1 in the United States, in Brazil this coefficient is close to 0.3, indicating smaller systematic risk. The relationship with the fixed income market is not that statistically relevant, neither in Brazil nor in the United States. Regarding the risk factors relevant to their returns, in addition to the market factor, it is observed that mainly size and value factors are significant. Unlike what is found in the literature, the momentum factor was not identified as significant in this work. The applicability of the results is also explored in the context of quantitative finance, focusing on investment strategies. The main application of the results from this work is finally given through a systematic value strategy that arbitrates moments when real estate investment trusts are relatively more expensive or cheaper. This strategy provides a Sharpe ratio of 0.4233 in the United States; a ratio that is higher than the ones found in long-only strategies in the analyzed markets. Even after robustness testing, results, although worse, remain interesting; which can ultimately be exploited by industry and academia.
